# 15303.ha.final
## abstract
In this paper we want to explore **reference marking and coherence in schizophrenia language** by measuring corpus distance of similar nouns preceded by specified determinants.
  
Inspired by @zimmerer\_deictic\_2017 we are interested in observations concerning coherence and propositional statement conditions in schizophrenia language. Further @nenchev\_linguistic\_2024 consider investigating in coherence as important "linguistic aspect in psychotic language addressing the relatedness between word chunks or sentences" an approach to "capture formal thought disorders (disorganisation, tangentiality, derailment and poverty of speech) in schizophrenia" (cf. @nenchev\_linguistic\_2024, 2.1: linguistic markers of schizophrenia). As this is not a clinical but a corpus linguistics study we do not intend to concur with recent psychiatric literature but rather take the subject as welcome task to test corpus linguistics methods.

Since above mentioned linguistic marker seems to play a crucial role within target group language features (and as such can be seen as asset of thinking- or world building capacity which might deviate from standard within the range of negative symptoms) we might with our approach add to the research done concerning frequency based analyses of how typical patients language might appear and how it deviates in terms of keywords or word fields. Our interest is more dedicated to the structural layer of the language which can not be described by raw frequencies. In our opionion disturbances on that layer might be hidden and not to grasp easily such that a listener would not always be able to precisely figure out what the disturbing factor is. Missing **coherence**, which we will investigate, may be a too narrow explanation to many impressions that schizophrene language leaves the listener with. But it seems to be a good starting point to unveiling structural patterns of patients language.

## definitions, terminology, assumptions
### coherence
There are several preliminary affordances to a successful communication. One is the *coherence* of a [text = way of communication](), which accounts for the partner being able to follow the topic and relate subjects and objects referenced. There can be more or less *common*  references and such, that need to be embedded in context to be understood. The underlying network of informations to create that context is what we call *information structure* of a text. The level of complexity of that network defines how simple it would be to gather the reference from the given information. We might have to go back many sentences or even infer reference from metaphors or such to be able to understand what is said while in the other case simply recall the subject of the last sentence to get the meaning (reference) of the pronoun in `also {she} said thisandthat...`. 
The capacity to imagine or have in mind, what concrete information is accessible to the adressee (what he actually knows or can infer) is key to a successful communication, since factors like common-ness, weltwissen and shared knowledge between adressant and adressee and informations accessible from the text itself vary depending on topic, setting, intimacy of the partners and such. So one cannot always be sure that the information provided is sufficient but the grade to which one can give a correct estimate to this sufficiency should here be the measure assuming that coherence in disturbed language is deficient which lets an utterance be more difficult to understand within the frame of given information.
Now one indicator of coherence we assume is *reference distance* where according to our hypothesis a larger distance would be observed in places where the adressant overestimates[^1] the ability of the partner to follow a reference. That would mean that we find a medium shorter distance between referent and reference in the reference corpus[^2] and larger distances in the target corpus. The references we are interested in are nouns that appear as anaphors i.e. here as noun analogies. The assumption is that if a noun is repeated *and* is combinded with certain preceding determiners, the speaker assumes that the adressee has some knowledge of what is talked about, depending on the strength of the determination. So e.g. [this, that, those, these]() would be rather strong determiners requiring that the noun was introduced before.

### premises
#### deictic anchoring and propositional complexity
@zimmerer\_deictic\_2017 consider
"Deictic anchoring [...] an inherent part of the process by which we make references to aspects in the world including entities, events, locations, and time." and define propositions as being "statements about the world which can be true or false." They mention, according to [@kuperberg\_language\_2010] "that in people with schizophrenia, cortical activity to semantic abnormalities in sentences is particularly small compared to controls if interpretation requires integration of several sentences" which can mean, that patients are not realising if their utterances are somehow disturbed on the semantics level.
If "Delusions and thought disorder can be considered disruptions of propositional meaning" then the patients feeling for their stated propositions (required to the adressee) and further the estimation about what he/she can assume as familiar to the adressee can be wrong. Following Klaus Konrad [@mishara\_klaus\_2010] who "described the onset of a delusion as the loss of ability to transcend an experience and see it with the eyes of others" @zimmerer\_deictic\_2017 assume that "in thought disorder, the ability to express coherent propositions can be severely impaired." We take that as premise for our research question.

## questions
Measuring the referent-reference distance which we assume as an indicator for coherence we hope to find empirical evidence for disturbed or not world building capacities within schizophrenia language. Premising that a large noun distance indicates a low reference-referent association we hypothesise that in a language/ToM setting where the speakers estimation of the audiences context understanding capacities is disturbed we will find higer medium scores for the distance under matching conditions. An environment which has potential to test our hypothesis is a reddit.com subreddit where the majority of participants describe themselves as being diagnosed with schizophrenia.[^3]  As reference corpus we chose reddit r/unpopularopinion. 
The distance measured should give us information structural evidence of how strong the noun occurences[^4] are connected, i.e. if a noun appears out of the blue mostly or if it somewhere before has been introduced to the audience and thus would be more or less legitimated to be determined by an antecedent. 
Our basic assumptions rely on the *taxonomy of given end new information* coined by @prince\_toward\_1981. She develops a hierarchy of references[^5] with specific relations to each other, where each item is attributed in terms of *familiarity*[^6], that defines ranges of 1. givennes in the sense of predictability/recoverability, 2. givenness in the sense of saliency, 3. givenness in the sense of "shared knowledge". (cf. @prince\_toward\_1981, pp. 226) We base our hypothesis of *reference distance as indicator for coherence* on this model assuming that the reference/association strength[^7] determines the level of text coherence. 

[^1]:	due to lack of empathy or a general self-alignment

[^2]:	where the participants may show a more realistic estimation of beforementioned ability

[^3]:	to prevent stigmatisation of the subreddit users we decided to not name it here.

[^4]:	preceded by conditioned determiners

[^5]:	informations in a text

[^6]:	cf. Prince: speaker assumptions about hearer familiarity = assumed familiarity

[^7]:	which should be weaker with growing distance between reference-referent

