Bricoleurs adopt a distinctive approach to their tasks. They first re view their already existing set of tools and materials to see what might  be useful in the context of some present problem. This suggests sev eral things about the modus operandi of bricoleurs. First, they do not  consider a project and then ask what tools and materials are required  for its completion. Rather, they review the materials they have at hand  and ask how they might be used to complete, or approximately com plete, the project. There is a fixed pool of materials. An understanding  of the nature of the project does not motivate the bricoleur to acquire  new materials. It is the possible uses of materials presently at hand  that determine the degree to which the project is completed.

Second, a bricoleur's means are collected not with some particular  use in mind but in the hope that they might turn out to be useful. Levi Strauss makes the point of saying the bricoleur works within a closed  universe and that the "rules of his game are always to make do with  whatever is at hand" (1974:17).

Third, the bricoleur's means are determined on the basis of past ex periences and are heterogenous and finite. Heterogeneity of means  arises from the fact that each element is open to a variety of uses and  allows the bricoleur to function without "the equipment and knowl edge of all trades and professions" (Levi-Strauss 1974:18). The individ ual means at the disposal of tradespersons and professionals, by con trast, tend "to have one definite and determinate use" (Levi-Strauss  1974:18)

Q: Lévi-Strauss's "Bricolage" and Theorizing Teachers' Work Author(s): Elizabeth Hatton Source: Anthropology & Education Quarterly , Jun., 1989, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Jun., 1989), pp. 74-96  Published by: Wiley on behalf of the American Anthropological Association Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3195683